In this video, I am going to show you an investigation into identifying circuits based on clustering
in a lower dimensional space.
Now, it sounds like it should be a very sensible and successful analysis approach to take, but I can
already tell you that is not going to work.
Well, the analysis will work, but they will not reveal meaningful circuits or clusters in the way
that we might want.
But that's actually fantastic, because if you want to advance research, you need to know what works.
And you also need to know what is unlikely to work.
And also, the methods that I will implement in this code demo are great reminders of some analysis
techniques, including t-SNE, DBscan, and K-means clustering.
Essentially, what I'm going to do here is statistically Identify MLP expansion neurons from one transformer
block that have significantly different activation magnitudes for either him or her, so the pronouns
him or her using the him and her sentences that we've used a few times before in this course.
Then we will see if we can use clustering to group these neurons into small circuits that are basically
behaving in very similar ways.
So yeah, it's a quite a sensible thing to do, but it turns out that it's not going to yield a reproducible
set of small clusters, at least not in this model that I will use here and not in the data set that
I have used here.
Perhaps the analysis approach could be useful, could be more fruitful for other models.
Maybe we would just need a much larger data set.
So I don't want to dismiss the approach that I will show you here completely out of hand.
But by the end of this video, I think you will agree that this approach was worth learning about,
but doesn't really give a nice set of results.
Anyway, let me jump right into the demo.
Overview.
I'm going to work with GPT two medium and hook all of the MLP expansion neurons from one layer.
I picked layer five, but the pattern of results seems pretty consistent across the different layers,
at least as far as I can tell from some explorations.
The size of the activations matrix is 108 by eight by 4096.
You will remember these sentences.
They are the same, but one set contains him and one set contains the word her.
And there are 54 EVPs of either gender, either pronoun, and so there's 108 altogether, and the sequences
are eight tokens long, including padding, and the 4096 corresponds to the dimensionality of.
So the embeddings dimensionality of 1024 with the four x expansion in the MLP layers.
Here you see some visualizations of the MLP neuron activations.
This image here shows all of the activation magnitudes pseudo colorized over all the neurons and over
all of the sentences.
You can see a lot of vertical stripes, which indicates that lots of neurons have particular biases
or like general offsets that are persistent for all the tokens that I have analyzed here.
And actually, if you look really carefully, you should be able to see a kind of horizontal line here
somewhere at around 54 rows That corresponds to the transition between him sentences and the her sentences.
Over here you see a distribution of all of the activation values.
The distribution is shifted negative, but it otherwise has a nice bell curve shape.
And finally over here, I've averaged over all of the neurons to get one activation value per sentence.
And just to be clear, all of the data that I'm showing here and all the data that we will be analyzing
in this video, these are the activations to the target word, him or her.
Given that the context surrounding that target word is exactly the same for the two target types.
But this plot is about all of the neurons pooled together and averaged together.
What we are interested in here is whether individual neurons show differential activation to him versus
her pronouns.
And here you see an example of that.
So this scatter plot looks similar to this one.
But this is just for one neuron.
It happens to be number 712.
Now clearly this neuron has a preference for the token her.
It's not a really super amazing perfect separation, but it would certainly be highly statistically
significantly different between these groups of sentences.
And this is interesting because remember that the first 54 and the second 54 sentences in this batch,
in this block are all.
So all the tokens here are exactly identical except for one word.
So the context is the same.
Okay.
So this is one neuron.
We can do a t test to compare the activations for for him versus her over all 4000 neurons.
And if we do that, we get a result that looks like this.
So here you see the neurons index on the x axis and the t values on the y axis.
The red x's in the middle are for the non-significant neurons.
So neurons for which the differences between activations for him sentences and her sentences was not
statistically significant.
And then in the purple circles are the neurons that had a significant difference in activation between
him and her.
For example, this one that I illustrated here was 712.
So that would be one one of these guys in here somewhere.
A positive T values indicate more activation for him, and negative t values indicate more activation
for the word her.
So these tests treat each neuron as a Is a completely independent entity.
Now that's kind of interesting, but it's not revealing any circuitry.
What we want to know is whether these neurons actually form circuits such that they are all interacting
with each other.
They're behaving in the same way.
Their activation values are strongly correlated.
So what I then did was take all of the significant neurons, use t-SNE to get the dimensionality down
to two and visualize the results.
And that looked like this.
So it looks pretty neat, looks like an eye.
And so on the one hand there is this beautiful separation between the positive and the negative T valued
neurons.
That is not trivial.
That just popped out of the clustering.
But on the other hand, if there were actual circuits or like little subnetworks inside this MLP expansion
layer, you would expect to see islands or clusters visually appearing in this plot.
And clearly that's not the case.
So at least from this statistical perspective, using t-SNE on these data, there isn't strong evidence
for small circuits for processing him versus her given identical context.
Now, to be honest, it doesn't really make any sense to continue doing clustering analyses on these
data.
But I did it anyway, partly because that was my original hypothesis.
That was my analysis plan, and partly because I think it's still good practice to have more experience
using clustering methods.
Well, okay.
So the DBscan results look beautiful in the sense of being really aesthetically pleasing.
So they're just nice to look at.
But the results are basically nonsense.
I mean, maybe you think that these really are some clusters forming in here in the data, but the problem
is, if you rerun this analysis multiple times, you will get wildly different results.
So these clusters, these apparent clusters are not reproducible over the same data set.
If you just repeat the clustering multiple times given like random initializations of the initial clustering.
Furthermore, you can also change the DBscan parameters even a little bit and you will again get wildly
different results.
I will show you that in the code and I encourage you to continue exploring it.
Anyway, finally, I also applied a K-means clustering, again based on the initial t-SNE results.
We don't really have a good justification for expecting meaningful results from K-means clustering.
But yeah, I did it anyway.
And it does highlight one of the features of K-means, which is that all of the data points just get
clustered based on local distances, and you're always going to get results, even if those results
are not really revealing any meaningful organizational patterns in the data.
You can see this cluster happened to get both negative and positive T valued neurons in the same cluster,
just based on proximity.
Okay, let's switch to code and have a more detailed look at this stuff.
Here are the libraries that I will use here, including t-SNE, DBscan and K-means.
All three of those from scikit learn and Scipy.stats to get the stats module.
Okay.
And then let's see here I'm importing Gpt2 medium.
This variable here n neurons.
That's just a convenience variable.
So I don't need to write out all of this business Every time I want to access the number 4096 that's
here.
So I'm just grabbing from any random transformer block.
They're all the same in in the sense of that counts.
Uh, MLP CFC so fully connected weights dot shape and that is going to return this number over here.
There we go okay.
Now I'm going to implant a hook.
Another thing I wanted to include in here is some printing statements inside the hook function.
This is not something you would typically want.
It's going to just print out the shape of the output matrix that I'm storing in here as the model processes
the tokens.
So every time you push a batch of tokens through the model, this shape is going to be printed out.
This is not for production.
Uh, it's for applications because it will just sort of take up some more computation time and also
is going to print out a lot of mess if you're processing a lot of tokens.
But for development, when you're working with your code, this sort of thing is really great.
You just insert a bunch of print statements.
Maybe inside this hook you're doing some more sophisticated processing, some additional calculations,
and so therefore this can be pretty handy.
Okay.
Let's see.
Did I run?
Yes, I already ran this code so I don't need to import it twice okay.
Yeah.
So then import implanting the hook into the fully connected layer.
Here again are the him and her sentences which you've now seen multiple times.
54 sentences exactly repeated.
But the first block of 54 has him.
And then we have a her over here.
Okay.
So let's see.
And then uh, let's see then.
Yeah.
I'm just also finding the target tokens.
I need that because the token the target tokens are in different indices in each sentence, and so to
know which activations we want to grab out of the model, we need to be able to identify these target
locations each time we or for each sentence.
Okay, so here I'm doing the forward pass.
And then you are going to see this thing printed out.
As I mentioned, this is not something you would want to do all the time in practice.
But when you are developing code it's great to do something like this.
Okay.
And then this is just confirmation.
So I only implanted into layer five transformer block five.
And here we see the size of the activations matrix okay.
This is also code you've seen before.
I have to find the location of the target token for each sentence.
So that's why I loop over sentences.
And here I'm looking for either the token for him or the token for her.
This code works because there is exactly one token target token per sentence.
If you have sentences with multiple targets in the same sentence, then you might need to adjust this
code a little bit.
Okay.
And then I'm grabbing the activations.
So I'm pulling it out of this layer, this sentence, this target token index, and then detaching it
and then converting it to numpy.
This part is particularly convenient because a lot of these subsequent analyses in scikit learn, for
example, just work better with numpy format compared to PyTorch format.
By the way, because I never need to use these activations in PyTorch format, it probably would have
been sensible for me to do something like this.
So right here, when I hook the activations, I can already detach them from the computational graph
and convert them into numpy.
Sometimes I do that and sometimes I don't.
But just so you know, that's pretty convenient to do sometimes.
Okay, so let's see here we are getting the activations.
Yep.
This code cell that's pretty fast to run.
Here I'm just creating these visualizations that I showed in the slides.
I don't know if you can see this horizontal line on the video screen.
Maybe you can see it on your Python window.
But basically there is, you know, some kind of like global shift happening around here where there's
a subtle but slight population shift from the Him sentences to the her sentences.
Okay.
So now here I'm just picking one neuron at random to visualize this neuron.
It doesn't.
Maybe there's a very tiny okay.
Visually it looks to me like there is a bit of a shift for these sentences for the her tokens compared
to the Him tokens, but I might just be reading into that.
Obviously in this plot I'm not doing any statistical analysis.
I'm not even looking at means and standard deviations.
This is just random visualizations.
And then there were a couple of neurons that I found literally just from randomly scooping around,
uh, that seemed to show really beautiful effects.
Look at that.
Really, really nice.
Okay.
So you can explore a little bit more.
Again, this is qualitative because I'm not doing any statistical analyses.
And I'm also just looking at one neuron at a time.
So this is also not very scalable.
Still it's really interesting and insightful to do this kind of visual kind of qualitative investigations
in your data.
Okay.
So now for more quantitative approaches here I'm running a t test on all of the neurons, all of all
the activations for the him sentences versus the her sentences.
This is the p value threshold I will use to evaluate the statistical significance.
It is 0.05 divided by the number of neurons.
That's Bonferroni correcting for multiple comparisons.
So this is going to give me a boolean vector here.
Actually maybe I'll show you what that looks like.
So I have this vector sig p values.
And it's a bunch of trues and falses.
It is true for every neuron.
So let me also show you the length of this.
That is 4096.
And it has a value of true every time the p value from the t test is less than 0.05, corrected for
multiple comparisons.
And when it's false, that means that the p value was greater than 0.05.
Okay.
And then yeah here I'm just finding and then visualizing the On significant devalued neurons and the
significant valued ones.
Okay.
So yeah, you see some interesting distributions here.
A couple of neurons show really, really, really striking differences between these two in the positive
direction and in the negative direction.
And lots of them are clustered towards closer to zero, but still significant.
Now if you would like to continue exploring these data, I think it would be pretty interesting to figure
out what is this maximum here.
Be pretty straightforward to find this maximum.
It's going to be somewhere around 1800 or so.
And then look at the plot for that neuron and see how good that separability is.
Okay.
But so for now I'm going to move forward.
The idea of this circuit analysis investigation by clustering is that it is possible.
So I had this idea, this hypothesis that if I look at the significant neurons, that may be some of
these are forming clusters, some of them are working together.
They have activation patterns that go up and down together.
So the neurons are kind of functionally coupled into a circuit.
Decent hypothesis.
That is a way that circuits are identified in other areas of complex systems analyses, including in
neuroscience.
So yeah.
So I proceeded from there.
So here's what I did.
I took only the neurons that show a p value less than 0.05 corrected.
So I'm not going to cluster all of the neurons.
You can also try that if you want.
I'll show you or I will tell you what that looks like in a moment.
Uh, and then yeah, this is just counting the number of neurons.
And so we see that out of all of the neurons.
So that's 4096 then.
Uh, yeah, a bit over a quarter of them, maybe 30 ish percent, 30 something percent of them were
significant.
Had a p value less than 0.05.
Okay.
So then what I'm going to do is use t-SNE to derive two components and then fit the data to the to the
model.
This, by the way, is just min max scaling the color values just for the coloring all of the individual
points here.
So essentially a min max scaling all the t values so that this value ends up being -1 or 0.
And this one ends up being plus one okay.
So here are the t-SNE results which you already saw in a screenshot.
So here we see the results of t-SNE again.
Beautiful, beautiful separation between the positive t values and the negative t value neurons.
But no.
Yeah.
Like obvious clusters that are being formed.
You can contrast that with the videos about Uh, using t-SNE on the embeddings vectors.
So that was from a couple of sections ago.
And their t-SNE worked really well.
So this is certainly not a repudiation of t-SNE.
It's just that in this particular data set, it really didn't work out very well.
Okay.
Uh, by the way, if you would include all of the neurons and not just the significant neurons, then
basically what you would see is all of this blank space in here gets filled in.
So you would see, like this density of neurons basically all throughout.
And it just looks like an almond shape.
Okay.
So yeah, no obvious clusters.
Maybe you think that this is a little cluster here, but it's really not.
You know, if you would just rerun this, you're going to get a different.
Well, the overall shape of the results is really consistent.
You will continue seeing that every time you run the analysis over and over again.
But these little tiny things that seem like they could be clusters.
Yeah.
Okay.
This one came out again.
But I don't think that these are really robust.
This shows the gram matrix.
This is the data times its transpose that you see here.
This, uh, if you would mean center the data, this would be a covariance matrix.
If you would suitably normalize the vectors in these matrices according to the norm of the vectors,
then this would be a cosine similarity matrix.
Of course, you could also normalize this further and make a correlation matrix, but this doesn't really
show that much.
What you would look for here is like blocks or clusters appearing in this kind of a plot.
Again, you have seen this sort of thing earlier in the course in, uh, analyses where t-SNE really
did work out quite well.
Okay.
Uh, there's a couple of parameters for t-SNE.
One is the number of of components.
I'm going to keep that as two just because then it's a little bit easier to visualize.
We don't have to worry about 3D graphs.
Another one is this perplexity parameter.
I've discussed this earlier in the course.
It basically relates to how much smoothing there is, connecting the low dimensional and the high dimensional
representations of the data.
You can try changing that parameter and just set it back to 30.
But it was 80.
So this is the result with perplexity value of 80.
It doesn't really change it that much.
And it certainly doesn't lead to like really nice beautiful little tiny isolated clusters.
As I mentioned in the slides, when we get if you see a result like this, you're not really statistically
justified to continue applying clustering analyses.
But because this is a teaching course and not a research, uh, analysis that I'm going to publish,
I decided to continue with my plan anyway.
Okay so here I'm applying DBscan results and I'm fitting the t-SNE results.
So these are the two dimensional data.
Let me just show you what this looks like t-SNE result dot shape.
This is 1523 by two 1523 is the number of statistically significant neurons.
And then two of course corresponds to these two dimensions over here.
Okay.
So this is what I'm putting into the DBscan analysis.
And here we go.
Yeah I mean this is wildly different from what I showed in the slides.
And basically you can keep running this over and over again.
I'm going to run this again with a perplexity of 30.
I think I set that back.
Yeah.
And basically, yeah, you keep running this over and over again and you're just not going to get sensible
results.
Every time you run it, the results will look a bit different.
Here we go.
Sometimes you think you see some clusters, but those are just not really reproducible, and they're
certainly not very compelling.
Furthermore, if you try to change this parameter here, remember this is the distance between pairs
of of units to form a group.
If you change that parameter you're also going to get wildly different results.
You can also see you know these plus signs.
These are non clustered.
This is what DBscan considers noise.
Remember that's what the N stands for.
But in my humble opinion these are just they're just not noise.
It's just not giving sensible results okay.
So what's happening here is I am making really small changes to the parameters and the results are changing
drastically.
And when that happens in any kind of an analysis, you should not trust the results.
You know, you change one parameter a tiny bit and the results change enormously.
That is not a good sign.
Okay, but all that said, you know, I feel like I'm being too negative here.
This plot looks really nice.
It's really pretty.
I think this could be, you know, you could print this out and, like, print it on a t shirt, and
it would be great.
Or, you know, this could be like, you could put this around your eyes and it would be really nice
for Halloween or for a party.
Okay.
Anyway, let's keep going.
So now what I'm doing is gathering some information about the t statistics for each group and just printing
out some information.
This kind of table, this kind of information is typically very useful.
Again I don't think it's useful in this particular situation because I do not believe that any of these
clusters are real in the data.
So what I'm doing now in this plot is let me generate this plot.
First is basically calculating a cosine similarities, sorting the neurons according to their group
identity, and then calculating cosine similarity.
So again, if there were really clusters formed in these data, what you would expect is to see blocks
on the diagonal like this.
This one actually looks really nice.
You would want to see blocks on the diagonal such that within the block the cosine similarity is really
high, and off of that block the cosine similarities are very low, close to zero, maybe a little bit
negative if there's some negative lateral interactions amongst the different clusters.
But that's not really the case here.
So also when I look at this I do not see evidence of clustering okay.
So again you know we are really not statistically justified to do a k means analysis.
But this is a really nice opportunity for you to see the code again for k means clustering just to get
some more familiarity with it.
And because, you know, this is all just gobbledygook.
Anyway, why don't we change the number of clusters to 13?
Because why not?
That's a lucky number I think.
Okay.
So here's the k means function.
I specify 13 clusters and then I fit the t-SNE results.
And then I generate the plot.
Here I'm plotting not only all the individual data points, but also the central the centroid of each
data point.
So this is the centroid of this cluster.
This is the centroid of this cluster and so on.
And here is again cosine similarities sorted.
So all the neurons sorted according to their group identity over here.
Now even if you think that these are like real clusters which I hope you don't think when you run the
code again you will get very different results just because of the random initialization involved in
K-means clustering.
A quote that I like a lot, which I find very often relevant, especially when I ran a neuroscience
research lab and had a lot of students and postdocs in my lab doing research.
Is this quote here from Alexander Graham Bell?
There are no unsuccessful experiments.
Every experiment contains a lesson.
So Bell, of course, was the guy who invented the telephone.
Not a bad legacy to leave behind.
Uh, and what this quote means is that every experiment that you do, every data analysis you run,
there's always something to learn.
Even if you do not get the results that you are hoping for.
There's always something useful to be learned, even from unexpected or disappointing results.
Now, to be honest, this is also something that annoys me very much about our scientific publishing
culture.
You know, we are incentivized to publish positive results and especially results that are surprising
or unexpected.
But there is so much to learn about how complex systems work and how they don't work.
By studying the analyses that seem like they should be insightful but end up not working out anyway.
So that's that.
I don't mean to be so dismissive or to dismiss this method.
It is very possible that this kind of approach would be much more successful.
Maybe for larger models, maybe for different kinds of target tokens, slightly different analyses,
or maybe in different parts of the model.
For example, you have seen that this exact same analysis approach was actually quite useful earlier
in the course when we were studying token embeddings with different embeddings matrices.